## Q: How does Unix create processes?
1. Fork (new child process with one thread, address space is an exact copy from parent)
2. Exec (init this)

## Fork

> Problem with exact copy of address space- how does child know it's the child?

Child is distinguished by *one variable* (return value of 0 for child, return value of processID for parent)

## Q: How can we efficiently create the copy address space?

point to same memory, only **copy-on-write** (when diverge)

## Q: Why copy the parent's address space?

> Inherit some state, want to make copy of ongoing process (e.g. make new tab in Terminal)

## Shells

Shells are normal programs (look like part of the OS)

How would you write one?
* while()
* ask for input (cin)
* first word of input is command
* fork a copy of the current process
* if child -> redirect output to a file if requested, exec new program
* if parent -> wait for child to finish OR can run child in background and ask for another command (e.g. add `&` to end of command)

## UNIX Philosophy

OS by programmers for pgrogrammers
* support high level languages (C and scripting)
* write programs with limited features (do one thing and do it well)

Core abstraction - everything is a file
* open (get a file descriptor)
* read/write (get/put data)
* close

### Why separate things into different processes?

> If one is buggy and crashes (e.g. flash), doesn't ruin everything else

#### Key insight

Core abstraction interface can be used for lots of things (e.g. persistent storage/real files, devices/network, temporary channels/pipes)

### Q: How do processes start running?

* process is already running (servers are assumed already up and running, launched by the kernel)
* shell is a program that runs other programs 

Communicate b/w processes using pipe `|` (temporary unnamed buffer)


### What does kernel do again?
1. manage the file system
2. launch/schedule programs
3. something else

### How does kernel know if sys call is allowed?
* look at user id (uid) of process making the call
* look at resources rquested
* checks access-control policy 
* decides if ok or nah

### How is a uid normally assigned to a process?
* on fork, child inherits parent's uid

### MOO accounting problem 

back of thompson and ritchie paper

### Access control

root/super user (uid 0) is like software kernel mode (more privileges)

need to run login/passwd as root (need to check all possible login info)

## Virtual Machine

### Key technique: 'trap and emulate'


